Fixed grammatical errors and simplified redundancies (#6597)
zio/zio: docs/datatypes/concurrency/ref.md

title: "Ref"
---

`Ref[A]` models a **mutable reference** to a value of type `A` in which we can store **immutable** data. The two basic operations are `set`, which fills the `Ref` with a new value, and `get`, which retrieves its current content.

`Ref` provides us a way to functionally manage in-memory state. All operations on `Ref` are atomic and thread-safe, giving us a reliable foundation for synchronizing concurrent programs.

`Ref`:
- is purely functional and referentially transparent
- is concurrent-safe and lock-free
- updates and modifies atomically

## Concurrent Stateful Application

> **`Ref` is is the foundation for writing concurrent stateful applications**. Anytime we need to share information between multiple fibers, and those fibers have to update the same information, they need to communicate through something that provides the guarantee of atomicity. Because `Ref` is **concurrent-safe**, we can share the same `Ref` among many fibers. All of which can update `Ref` concurrently, removing the worry of race conditions. Even if we had ten thousand fibers all updating the same `Ref`, as long as they are using atomic update and modify functions, we will have zero race conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**`Ref` is the foundation for writing concurrent stateful applications**. Anytime we need to share information between multiple fibers, and those fibers have to update the same information, they need to communicate through something that provides the guarantee of atomicity. Because `Ref` is **concurrent-safe**, we can share the same `Ref` among many fibers. All of which can update `Ref` concurrently, removing the worry of race conditions. Even if we had ten thousand fibers all updating the same `Ref`, as long as they are using atomic update and modify functions, we will have zero race conditions.
```

## Operations

> Though `Ref` has many operations, here we will introduce the most important, or common ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though `Ref` has many operations, here we will introduce the most common and important ones.
```

def make[A](a: A): UIO[Ref[A]]
```

> As we can see, the output is wrapped in `UIO`, which means creating `Ref` is effectful. Whenever we `make`, `update`, or `modify` the `Ref`, we are doing some effectful operation. This distinction helps maintain the API's referential transparency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see, the output is wrapped in`UIO`, which means creating a `Ref` is effectful. Whenever we `make`, `update`, or `modify` the `Ref`, we are performing an effectful operation.
```

We probably shouldn't reference referential transparency.

> _**Warning**_:  
>

> > The big mistake to creating a `Ref` is trying to store mutable data inside it, which doesn't work. The only way to use a `Ref` is to store **immutable data** inside it. We are otherwise not provided atomic guarantees, which means we can have collisions and race conditions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The big mistake when creating a `Ref` is trying to store mutable data inside it, which doesn't work. A`Ref` must be used with **immutable data**. Otherwise, we lose our atomic guarantees, which can lead to collisions and race conditions. 
```

}
```

> The above snippet doesn't behave deterministically. This program sometimes prints 2 and sometime prints 1. We can fix it by using `update`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above snippet doesn't behave deterministically. This program sometimes prints `2` and sometimes prints `1`. We can fix it by using `update`:
```

  } yield ()
}
```

> What happens if between running the update and get, another update in another fiber occurred? We would see that this function doesn't perform in a deterministic fashion in concurrent environments. So we need a way to perform a combination of **get, set, get** atomically. This is where `modify` comes in. Here we will edit `request` to use `modify`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What happens if, between running `update` and `get`, a second `update` occurs on another fiber? This would not behave deterministically in concurrent environments. So we need a way to perform a combination of **get, set, get** atomically. This is where `modify` comes in. Here we will edit `request` to use `modify`:
```

```

## AtomicReference in Java 

> For Java programmers, we can think of `Ref` as an `AtomicReference`. Java has a `java.util.concurrent.atomic` package which contains `AtomicReference`, `AtomicLong`, `AtomicBoolean` and so forth. `Ref` has roughly the same power, guarantees, and limitations as `AtomicReference`, but, is packaged in a higher-level context and of course, is ZIO friendly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Java programmers, we can think of `Ref` as an `AtomicReference`. Java has a `java.util.concurrent.atomic` package which contains `AtomicReference`, `AtomicLong`, `AtomicBoolean` and so forth. `Ref` has roughly the same power, guarantees, and limitations as `AtomicReference`, but is higher-level and ZIO-friendly. 
```
